---
title: "Tweeting for 10,000 Years: An Experiment in
  Autonomous Software"
published_at: 2018-06-18T15:35:11Z
location: San Francisco
hook: TODO
---

Deep inside a Texas mountain, a clock is being built.
Unlike other clocks, this one is designed for longevity on
a scale that's incomprehensible to the designers of similar
apparatuses. The counterweight for its drive mechanism is
housed in a hollowed out shaft that's 500 feet high and 12
feet in diameter and weighs an unbelievable 10,000 pounds.
The periodic chimes it plays are controlled by 20 huge
horizontal gears, each of which is 8 feet in diameter. Its
timing is controlled by a 6-foot pendulum assembly
terminating with football-sized titanium weights. It swings
as unhurriedly as one might imagine, taking a full ten
seconds to move back and forth. Components have been
machined to within tolerances of a fraction of an inch,
rather than thousandths, so that they'll keep working
despite inevitable entropic damage caused by the likes of
expansion and rust.

TODO: Picture of mechanism.

If all goes well, the clock will keep time for 10,000
years. It's called "[Clock of the Long Now][clock]", and is
a project of the [Long Now Foundation][longnow], who aim to
provide a counterpoint to today's accelerating trend
towards an ever shortening attention span in society by
fostering long-term planning and responsibility. They
consider long thinking to be on the centuries scale and
beyond, and their aim is to to construct frameworks that
will be functional for 10,000 years. As a reminder of this
charter, the Long Now represents years in five digits
instead of four -- to them, it's the year 02018.

## Tweeting as long as possible (#tweeting)

Software isn't as well suited to operate on these sorts of
grand scales, but our industry is reliably short-sighted
when it comes to building products that will last, and we
could stand to be inspired by the work being done on the
Clock of the Long Now.

I wanted to write a little experiment that reuses some of
the clock's design principles to see how long I
could make a simple program last without my intervention. I
[built one][perpetual] that will post a total of ten canned
tweets to my timeline on an exponential scale -- the
soonest will have gone out just a few minutes before this
article was published, and the latest scheduled to fire
10,000 years from now. Here's the first in the sequence:

TODO: Screenshot of tweet.

Each tweet is prefixed with a magic string and number like
"LHI001" ("LHI" stands for "long heartbeat interval") so
that the scheduled tweets are recognizable, and so that the
program can easily find the last one that it published.

Here's the code that checks whether Twitter should be
updated (somewhat simplified for succinctness):

``` go
func Update(api TwitterAPI, intervals []*Interval, now time.Time)
        (int, error) {

    it := api.ListTweets()

    for it.Next() {
        lastTweet = it.Value()

        id, ok = extractIntervalID(lastTweet.Message)
        if ok {
            break
        }
    }

    if it.Err() != nil {
        return -1, it.Err()
    }

    var nextIntervalID int
    if ok {
        // Pick the next interval in the series
        nextIntervalID = id + 1
    } else {
        // If ok is false, we never extracted an interval ID, which
        // means that this program has never posted before. Pick the
        // first interval ID in the series.
        nextIntervalID = 0
    }

    if nextIntervalID >= len(intervals) {
        return -1, nil
    }

    interval := intervals[nextIntervalID]

    if interval.Target.After(now) {
        fmt.Printf("Interval not ready, target: %v\n", interval.Target)
        return -1, nil
    }

    tweet, err := api.PostTweet(
        formatInterval(nextIntervalID, interval.Message))
    if err != nil {
        return -1, err
    }

    return nextIntervalID, nil
}
```

## Time and scale (#time)

It's a fun idea, but as you may have already surmised, my
program won't be tweeting for 10,000 years, and it'll be
very lucky if it even makes it to 100 years (see
[Existential threats](#threats) below). Humans tend to have
a hard time imagining increasing orders of magnitude in a
well-documented phenomenon called [scope
insensitivity][insensitivity]; we can all easily do the
arithmetic that tells us there are 1,000 ten year segments
in 10,000, but it's difficult to appreciate how much more
time that really is. To our minds, ten thousand, a million,
ten million, and so on are all just _really big_.

Consider that the oldest pyramid, the Pyramid of Djoser at
Saqqara, isn't quite 5,000 years old, and that's _ancient_.
As young Cleopatra, and who lived alongside some of
history's other most famous figures like Julius Caesar,
Mark Antony, and Augustus, looked up the huge stone
monuments that were her country's legacy, consider that
they'd been constructed further back in history for her
(she was born 69 BC) than she is back in history for us in
2018. We have a few human artifacts from as far back as
10,000 years ago, but they mostly amount to fragments of
pots.

But just because the program is unlikely to succeed on its
10,000 year mission doesn't mean that we can't apply
principles for long term thinking to improve its chances.

!fig src="/assets/10000-years/monolith.jpg" caption="We have many artifacts from ancient humanity, but 10,000 years predates almost all of them."

## Hedging against failure (#hedging)

The program is engineered with a number of features with
the aim of making it as minimally prone to failure:

* It runs on a ***serverless*** architecture, so it's well
  insulated against failures in underlying infrastructure
  like if a single server were to die. That infrastructure
  will also get regular updates for security and stability.

* I'm running it on ***AWS Lambda***, a service provided by a
  big company (Amazon) that's likely to be long-lived, and
  has a history of _not_ retiring products and only making
  minimal breaking changes.

* It contains ***no persistent state*** of its own and
  instead relies entirely on state returned from Twitter's
  API. Databases are especially prone to aging and
  operational problems, and not including one improves the
  program's chances.

* In the spirit of [production minimalism](/minimalism),
  there are ***very few moving parts***: just the program
  itself, Twitter's API, and the underlying serverless
  infrastructure.

* ***I'm using Go***. As described in [Go on
  Lambda](/go-lambda#tenacity), its 1.x series has a
  remarkable history of longevity and near perfect
  backwards compatibility. Even if Go 2 were to be
  released, I expect that there's a good chance that my
  program would be compatible.

* Relatedly, Go is a ***statically typed language*** which
  means that the code I wrote is more likely to actually
  work. I've also written a ***comprehensive test suite***.

* The program compiles down to a ***self-contained
  binary***, so it won't be broken by changes to its
  bootstrap or dependencies (compared to say Ruby and the
  like, where an eventual upgrade to Bundler could mean
  that your program no longer starts).

## Existential threats (#threats)

Over this kind of timeline, the program faces many
existential threats. One of them will knock it offline
eventually, the question is: which one?

* Maybe the most common of all failures is an
  ***application bug***. I've tried to protect against one
  through testing, but I could've easily overlooked a
  subtle edge case.

* Changes in ***Twitter's API*** would be the end. Say that
  they either introduce a backwards incompatible change
  like a new required parameter, shift in the structure of
  responses, or change in our applications authenticate.

* Relatedly, changes in ***Twitter's product*** might also
  spell disaster. Say they move to a new pricing model, or
  fold as a company.

* Risks on ***AWS*** are similar. There's a minimal API that Go
  programs on Lambda use to communicate with the service,
  and that could change. The Lambda product could be
  retired. I've set up the program to be able to run only
  on free tier, but that could change, or the account its
  running under could become delinquent for some other
  reason.

* If left running long enough, **the binary** I've upload
  to Lambda might become incompatible with the underlying
  virtual and hardware infrastructure, or with the
  operating systems low level APIs. It would need to be
  recompiled with a newer version of Go to work again.

## What we can learn from a clock (#learn)

The Clock of the Long Now had a few basic principles and
requirements that drove its design:

* ***Longevity:*** The clock should be accurate even after
  10,000 years, and must not contain valuable parts (such
  as jewels, expensive metals, or special alloys) that
  might be looted.

* ***Maintainability:*** Future generations should be able
  to keep the clock working, if necessary, with nothing
  more advanced than Bronze Age tools and materials.

* ***Transparency:*** The clock should be understandable
  without stopping or disassembling it; no functionality
  should be opaque.

* ***Evolvability:*** It should be possible to improve the
  clock over time.

* ***Scalability:*** To ensure that the final large clock
  will work properly, smaller prototypes must be built and
  tested.

It doesn't take all that much creative thinking to see how
these are largely applicable to the software industry as
well.

[clock]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clock_of_the_Long_Now
[insensitivity]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scope_neglect
[longnow]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Long_Now_Foundation
[perpetual]: https://github.com/brandur/perpetual
