---
title: Caffeine
published_at: 2018-07-07T07:18:38Z
hook: TODO
---

One morning about three weeks ago I woke up, and as
circumstances would have it, had to skip my morning coffee.
Later in the day, as I was making my way to work, I
realized that I didn't feel much different than the day
before, or any other day. I decided to continue the
accidental experiment by dropping all forms of caffeine:
coffee, tea, soft drinks, and the various forms of
[mat√©][mate] energy drinks that I've taken a liking to in
recent years.

Until then, I'd been drinking the equivalent of four or
five cups worth of coffee a day. Apparently, I was drinking
_so much_ of it that its benefits like improved alertness
and reduction of fatigue just weren't working very well
anymore.

But while I was so conditioned that caffeine wasn't doing
much good, its negative effects were still out in full
force. I'd occasionally experience midday crashes, or have
trouble concentrating. Worse yet, I'm an anxious person as
it is, and caffeine seemed to further exacerbate that
facet; in the worst cases even adding a physical component
to the problem in the form of jitters.

Quitting caffeine had no obvious downsides, and some
immediately noticeable improvements in quality of life
(albeit minor). I still like hanging out in cafes, and
quickly found out which of my favorites did a good job with
decaf. I was lucky enough to not experience any withdrawal
symptoms.

I try not to subscribe to absolutist positions, and don't
intend to take one with caffeine either. I brewed some tea
last night and had my first caffeine in almost a month. It
was one most focused evenings I've had in a long time: I
got through about a hundred pages of the book I'm reading,
read through some of my magazine backlog, and managed a
late night meditation session, all of which are normally
activities that send me straight to sleep within minutes if
I try any of them after eight o'clock [1].

Caffeine is a powerful tool, but apparently for me only
when used in moderation. Your mileage may vary.

[1] In fact, it worked a little _too_ well, and I found
myself up later than I wanted to be.

[mate]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mate_(drink)
