---
title: The iPhone X
published_at: 2017-12-07T16:01:46Z
hook: TODO
---

I wasn't sure if I'd like the iPhone X, but after the
recent release of iOS 11 slowed my iPhone 6 to a crawl and
it being the biggest jump that Apple's made in a while, I
got one anyway.

I'm glad I did. I had my doubts, but after a few days of
use I can say definitively that the iPhone X is an
incredible piece of technology. It's easily the best phone
that I've ever owned.

Its screen is the most immediately notable feature. The
edge-to-edge display with its rounded corners is beautiful.
OLED is great -- blacks are really black and it's
comfortable to read in even broad daylight. I was worried
that it would be marred by the notch, but I hardly notice
it: black levels are so good that it often invisibly fades
into dark app headers. Even when it doesn't, it looks fine.

My biggest surprise is that FaceID works and I don't miss
TouchID. I assumed that Apple was pushing through a
half-baked technology so that the new phone could conform
to a misguided vision of perfect aesthetic correctness. I
was wrong. The only time FaceID hasn't worked for me is
when I'm laying on my side in bed and half my face is sunk
into a pillow. It's a little annoying, but no more so than
TouchID being non-functional when your hands are even a
little moist.

I don't miss the home button. Its absence looks better to
be sure, but far more importantly, the replacement
interactions are _better_. Swiping up to go home works
perfectly, and moving up and right to access multi-tasking
is faster than the old double-press on home.

It feels more grippy to me than my iPhone 6. The glass back
looks great, and I can't wait for wireless charging. It's a
little thicker and its camera protrusion is more
pronounced, but it doesn't matter at all.

My biggest fear by far is software performance. Its speed
today is perfect, but given a few more iOS 11-esque updates
over the next couple years (and Apple's historical track
record all but guarantees that we'll see more of them) will
be enough to slow even its powerful processors to a crawl.
FaceID is the scariest piece: it's just fast enough today,
but a considerable degradation would kill everything that's
good about the feature. I have nightmares of a $1k phone that
takes 5-10 seconds to unlock two years into ownership.

Apple's had a good year. Both [AirPods](/fragments/airpods)
and the iPhone X are home runs. I'm now more excited than
ever to see the what they make of the upcoming HomePod and
Mac Pro.
