---
title: Mount Kōya, Ancient Baths, and Exacting
  Compilers
published_at: 2018-06-23T15:31:47Z
---

![The Kumano Kodo](/assets/passages/003-koya/shining-light@2x.jpg)

(A _much_ belated hello.)

I'd intended to write about six months ago, but am only
getting around to it now. I'd picked out the photographs
that I wanted to use last December, but looking at them in
my draft brought back such strong memories that for the
longest time, I didn't feel up to writing the words to fill
the gaps. I still don't, but I'm edging right up to the
point of sheer absurdity in writing about an old vacation,
so it's time.

Last year I wrote about a trip to Japan, but even after a
few thousand words I was only halfway done. I talked about
how the country has some of those best metropolises in the
world. This time I'll try to convince you that it has some
of the greatest wild areas on the planet too. Before going
to Tokyo, Keiko and I spent a week down south in the
Wakayama Prefecture, making our way from coast to coast by
way of a network of ancient pilgrimage routes called the
Kumano Kodo.

I'm about to talk about hiking, a lot. I'm holding a rough
pace of three to four messages a year, so I hope you'll
consider this newsletter to be as far opposite on the
continuum from spam as you can go, but if you don't, you
can [click here to never hear from me again][unsubscribe].

![Torii at Mount Kōya](/assets/passages/003-koya/torii@2x.jpg)

We in the west tend to think of Japan as a crowded island,
but the lush greenery of its wilderness is pristine.
Walking the Kumano Kodo is a singular experience. The
stones underfoot look a thousand years old, and the _torii_
arches overhead are timeless. Days are spent in perfect
tranquility in the fresh mountain air and nights are spent
in perfect relaxation at ryokan along the way. It's a
spiritual experience even for the non-spiritual -- you feel
the country's ancient [_kami_][kami] with every step.

## A holy mountain & otherworldly gate (#holy-mountain)

Our journey started at the busy central station in Osaka,
where we boarded a train and headed south. The dense
cityscape began to thin out, then disappear, and a few more
passengers got off at every stop along the way. We didn't
notice exactly when it happened, but eventually the big
city crowd that we'd started with was gone, and we had the
train largely to ourselves.

Our first destination was Mount Kōya (Kōya-san), a mountain
with a small Shinto town (Kōya-chō) built high on its
slopes. First settled by monks around the year 800,
Kōya-chō has grown to host an incredible 120-odd temples
today. Normally, it's possible to reach the town by taking
a train and transferring onto a mountain-scaling
[funicular], but this route was out of operation
indefinitely after damage from a recent typhoon. Instead,
we took a bus up through the mountain's winding roads.

As the bus rounds one last hairpin bend, you get your first
glance of Kōya-chō as the magnificent Daimon Gate
materializes out of the mist. It looks like an artifact
from another world, completely out of place on these remote
slopes.

![Mount Kōya](/assets/passages/003-koya/koya@2x.jpg)

Most of the accommodation on the mountain comes in the form
of _shukubō_, or "temple lodgings". Monks running the local
temples open their doors to visitors, who are fed, clothed
(with ever-practical [yukatas][yukata]), and given a place
to stay and bathe in return for a small fee.

The temples are better run than any hotel. We entered
through the front door of the one we'd selected (Jokiin)
and were astonished to find a 4-by-6 grid of pairs of
slippers, arranged in perfect symmetry. We were greeted by
a smiling hostess, led down the hall to an entry room,
seated, and served tea while we finalized a few details on
the paperwork.

We walked down long echoing hallways to our room, off a
wing of the temple that overlooked its immaculate garden.
Accommodation in Japan can often be quite small -- just a
few tatami mats in size [1], and that constraint forces a
certain creativity in the use of the space. Rooms are
silently transformed while you're out in the evening, from
a mostly empty space for sitting, to one with an unfurled
bed for sleeping. In a place like Jokiin where meals are
served in-room, there's also an intermediate transformation
to prepare it for dinner. We'd often find monks quietly
checking in on our room, hoping that we were out so that
they could take the opportunity to rearrange it. We
couldn't spend too much time in the room or we'd compromise
their precise schedules.

![Jokiin](/assets/passages/003-koya/jokiin@2x.jpg)

![A typical in-room meal arrangement at Jokiin](/assets/passages/003-koya/jokiin-meal@2x.jpg)

### The kotatsu (#kotatsu)

The monks' spartan lifestyle is that some of the luxuries
that we might take for granted in the west -- like central
heating -- are non-existent. This time of year the mercury
sits close to zero, especially in the mornings and at
night, and a simple walk through the temple's halls is a
bone-chilling experience. There's an on-site onsen, and its
healing waters will do wonders to warm you up, but
afterwards you're left with a real challenge: getting back
to your room.

Japan has an ingenious device for cold days called a
[kotatsu]. It's a low table with blankets hanging off its
edges, and an electric heater underneath -- a perfect place
to take refuge during frigid evenings. It's common
knowledge in the country that once you're under a kotatsu,
you can't get back out (it's too comfortable). Every word
of it is true.

### A wintery morning (#wintery-morning)

We woke up the next morning to find a fresh layer of white
powder on the mountain's temple roofs and courtyards -- the
first snowfall of the season. I ran from Daimon Gate up
nearby Mount Bentendake, trying to be mindful not to slip
on the newly slick paths and throw myself into the
underbrush [2]. I found that an old shrine had been built
on its peak.

![First snow at Mount Kōya](/assets/passages/003-koya/first-snow@2x.jpg)

We spent the day exploring the spectacular [Okunoin
cemetary][okunoin] before saying farewell to Kōya-chō and
departing the mountain.

## Yunomine Onsen (#yunomine)

Kōya's technically reachable along the Kumano Kodo, but
along a leg that wasn't possible in our budgeted time.
Instead, we bused back down to a coastal town called
Tanabe, and our real journey began the next morning as we
set out from its local trailhead. After another two days of
hiking and an overnight in a charming small town called
Chikatsuyu-oji, we reached Yunomine Onsen.

In [002][passages002] I talked about certain villages famed
for their onsens might adopt the word into their name. This
is the case for Yunomine -- a little cluster of inns tucked
into a valley in the heart of the Kumano mountains, built
around a natural fountain of searing water frothing out of
the earth.

![Yunomine](/assets/passages/003-koya/yunomine@2x.jpg)

This was the one night on our hike that we'd splurged on a
pricier hotel, and as we climbed its steps we were
surprised to see Keiko's name drawn out in elaborate
hand-written Kanji next to the door. Every morning the
innkeepers wake up and carefully write out the names of all
the travelers who will be staying the night.

Our room was large and minimally furnished in the most
tasteful way possible, with a single low table ornamenting
its expansive floors (like at Kōya, bedding would appear
later in the night). A balcony surrounded by neatly-trimmed
trees gave us a perfect vantage onto the tiny village.

A common pastime for locals and visitors alike is to slow
boil eggs in the hot spring's waters, and we found half a
dozen people working on just that when we arrived -- you
can see some being sold for cooking in the photo below.
Later in the trip we'd visit Ōwakudani ("Great Boiling
Valley") on the slopes of Mount Hakone (an active volcano),
where the onsen eggs come out a shade of soot black, having
picked up coloration from the sulfur springs where they're
cooked.

![Onsen eggs](/assets/passages/003-koya/eggs@2x.jpg)

![Boiler](/assets/passages/003-koya/boiler@2x.jpg)

### Tsuboyu (#tsuboyu)

The hot spring at Yunomine is _old_. It's considered to be
one of Japan's oldest, discovered about 1,800 years ago. An
ancient bathhouse called Tsuboyu that's built right on top
of the stream running through town lets you get as close as
possible to the spring's source, and is considered to be
the only place in the world where you can bathe in a
registered UNESCO World Heritage Site.

![Tsuboyu (outside)](/assets/passages/003-koya/tsuboyu-1@2x.jpg)

It's a popular bathhouse for couples -- probably because
its cozy quarters won't hold much else. As we squeezed into
the pool's perfectly blue waters, we realized that even
just the two of us were going to be a tight fit. Getting
into the bathhouse is an adventure of its own, involving a
walk down to the other side of the village where you can
negotiate with an elderly gentleman for a placard which you
will hang above the door of Tsuboyu as you enter. They're
distributed sequentially, and show a number that signals to
waiting groups roughly how long they have until it's their
turn in the cabin (we were waiting on group "7" above).

![Tsuboyu (inside)](/assets/passages/003-koya/tsuboyu-2@2x.jpg)

## The road to Nachi Taisha (#nachi-taisha)

The last day of our hike involved trekking over a mountain
blanketed in a broadleaf evergreen forest. Unlike most
mountains you can climb, this one features stone-cut stairs
the whole way up and down, each of them laboriously dragged
into place over decades. It was cool and quiet. The number
of other hikers we passed along the way could be counted
comfortably on one hand.

![Coins at a shrine](/assets/passages/003-koya/coins@2x.jpg)

![Painted tree](/assets/passages/003-koya/painted-tree@2x.jpg)

![Ancient forest](/assets/passages/003-koya/ancient-forest@2x.jpg)

The mountain spit us out on the other side into Nachi
Taisha, an expansive Shinto shrine built halfway up its
face. Along with a breathtaking view out to the Pacific,
the shrine also overlooks Nachi-no-Otaki, Japan's tallest
waterfall at 133 meters.

![Nachi-no-Otaki](/assets/passages/003-koya/nachi-taisha@2x.jpg)

The end of the hike was a bittersweet moment. Our sore feet
welcomed it, but it was sad to see the trail go, and we
were only partially comforted by the beautiful vistas
before us as consolation prize. We visited the foot of
the waterfall, then checked in at a local inn with an
eccentric owner who'd asked for our hiking schedule, and
refused to give us a reservation because he didn't think
we'd make the last leg of our trip in time. He only
acquiesced when we promised to call at noon on the day of
and confirm that we were well passed the halfway point. We
had, and he let us stay the night.

The next morning we made our way out to the ocean and
onward to Tokyo.

## Ponto-chō & beautiful alleys (#pontosho)

Like a hundred million visitors to Japan before us, we made
our way through Kyoto. We visited the traditional
attractions like [Fushimi Inari-taisha][fushimiinari]
(recognizable by its rows of hundreds of _torii_ painted in
a bright vermilion) and [Nijō Castle][nijocastle], but I
was most impressed by Kyoto's alleys. There's a famous one
running through the Ponto-chō district parallel to the Kamo
river that's particularly spectacular.

Lined with restaurants and businesses on both sides and
hundreds of people milling about to see them, it's
as vibrant of a public place as you'll ever find. Small and
human-scale, here it's people who are given priority
instead of the screaming traffic found on most city
streets. I found myself wondering what an entire city built
like _Ponto-chō_ would look like.

![Ponto-chō](/assets/passages/003-koya/pontocho@2x.jpg)

## Wabi-sabi & aged leather (#wabisabi)

The last time a sole failed on one of my boots, I did
something unconventional. Instead of throwing the pair of
them out, I repaired the broken boot. While not quite the
point of a existential alarm, I'm more than a little
disturbed these days by just how disposable everything I
own tends to be. Half of it seems designed with planned
obsolescence in mind (I can measure the year by counting
how many Sennheiser earphones I send back for warranty),
and half of it is just junk. Where possible, I've been
making an effort to buy higher quality products that have
some chance of longevity.

I wore these boots for the length of our hike in Japan, and
to my pleasure, the trip only had the effect of bringing
out more of their character. The leather darkened, and they
picked up a few more nicks and lines. There's something
distinctly beautiful about an object that's aged well --
it's imperfect, and you can see history and obvious
ephemerality in its rugged appearance. The Japanese call
this idea [_wabi-sabi_][wabisabi], an old aesthetic
centered around transience and imperfection that's derived
from the Buddhist teachings of the three marks of
existence.

![Thousand Mile boots](/assets/passages/003-koya/thousand-mile@2x.jpg)

## Rust & the pursuit of reliable software (#rust)

I've been writing a lot of [Rust][rust]. The language has
developed a bit of a reputation for its Haskell-esque (and
some might say Kakfa-esque) strictness when it comes to
compile-time checks, with very strict rules around
reference counting and object movement in memory (usually
stack-allocated by convention) specifically. At first, I
found working with it to be intolerable. The compiler
seemed to be written to be as pedantic as possible, and
some subtle problem with borrowing or ownership got in my
way of everything I tried to do, which left me stuck and
getting little done. But after a few months of hard slog
and solid focus, the walls finally started to break down
and I even started liking it, a lot.

Its oft-stated benefits like type safety, efficient use of
memory, and great performance are all true, but beyond that
there's just an element of consistency and good taste that
pervades throughout every part of the language. Unlike
other popular languages (*cough*, Go), the core team
doesn't cover up or dismiss its mistakes, and instead even
very fundamental design problems get fixed. This is best
exemplified by the recent release of [`impl
Trait`][impltrait], and the upcoming futures rebuild and
addition of [native `async`/`await`][asyncawait]. It's a
pleasure to work with, and has the most helpful community
you can possibly imagine.

I wrote a piece about [architecting a web application in
Rust][rustweb] and another about [overcoming its sharp
edges][rustreflections].

## GraphQL & the future of web APIs (#graphql)

I've been thinking about web APIs lately, specifically
about the status quo, possibilities for the future, and
where industry is likely going from here. We reveled in our
own ingenuity when we banished SOAP, but did we make things
all that much better? Today's generation of REST APIs are
widespread, but they share little with each other beyond a
common response format (JSON) and some loose conventions
around mapping HTTP verbs to CRUD actions. The promises of
discoverability, change resistance, and automation made by
REST/hypermedia have had ten years to materialize, but
never have.

I wrote a [a recent piece on GraphQL][graphql], a
technology which I find interesting on a number of
dimensions. Its improved queryability, well-defined
specification, built-in capacity to self-describe, and
predisposition to be gracefully evolved would be a vast
improvement over the irregular patchwork world of semi-REST
that we have today.

## On long silences (#long-silences)

If you made it this far, you've just read 2,500+ words
about Japan and software, which is more than anyone should
have to put up with from me -- thanks (and congratulations
_and_ condolences) for getting all the way through! I'll
try not to wait another half year before writing again, but
as usual, you can hear from me sooner by replying to this
message.

[1] In Japan, it's common even today to measure the size of
a room by the number of tatami mats that fit in it. A
standard Nagoya-sized tatami is about 1.653 square meters,
but the size differs region to region. In Kyoto, mats are
0.955m by 1.91m, and referred to as _Kyōma_ tatami. In
Tokyo, they're 0.88m by 1.76m and called _Edoma_ tatami.
Shops were traditionally designed to be 5 1/2 mats in size,
and tea rooms 4 1/2 mats.

[2] As life would have it, I successfully managed to stay
on the path while running the treacherously slick slopes of
Mount Bentendake, but a few months later somehow managed to
eject myself on a trail run in bone-dry California. I was
fine, but unfortunately the same couldn't be said for the
screen on my poor mint-up-to-that-moment iPhone X.

[asyncawait]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/2394-async_await.md
[funicular]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Funicular
[fushimiinari]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fushimi_Inari-taisha
[graphql]: https://brandur.org/graphql
[impltrait]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/1522-conservative-impl-trait.md
[kami]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kami
[kotatsu]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kotatsu
[nijocastle]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nij%C5%8D_Castle
[okunoin]: https://www.flickr.com/photos/brandurleach/albums/72157690899717745
[passages002]: https://brandur.org/passages/002-japan
[rust]: https://www.rust-lang.org/en-US/
[rustreflections]: https://brandur.org/fragments/rust-reflections
[rustweb]: https://brandur.org/rust-web
[unsubscribe]: %unsubscribe_url%
[wabisabi]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wabi-sabi
[yukata]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yukata
